
Telling The Story - A Passover Haggadah Explained
Copyright © 2006 by Barry Louis Polisar
All rights reserved.
ISBN # 0-938663-51-8
Illustrations © by Sierra Hannah Polisar
Typography and design by Chris Abshire
The Haggadah was originally designed to help people understand
and appreciate the significance of the Passover story but Haggadot
can be confusing to those not familiar with the holiday traditions.
I felt there was a need for a simple, basic Haggadah that would keep
with the traditional order of the night — and also follow the Torah
commandment to “tell the story.”  I also wanted to give a little more
background on why we do what we do each year to help re-connect
with the original spiritual reasons that gave birth to our traditions.  
The Haggadah is in itself a ritualized retelling of the Passover
story, and through the years it has been adapted and changed.
Though originally written in Hebrew and Aramaic, Rabbis urged
that the story be told in a language that would be accessible to all.
There is a long tradition of finding new ways to recount the story of
the exodus in order to make it more engaging to those at the Seder
table but sometimes the symbolism and significance of the holiday is
sacrificed in the retelling. This Haggadah, illustrated by my
daughter, is presented with the hope that readers and families will be
encouraged to add their own traditions and make this story a living
one that evolves and becomes more meaningful each year.
BLP
3
My Grandmother’s father Louis had a story he used to tell. It was
about God giving the Jewish people religion, and my Grandmother
told the story to me when I was young.  “It’s really not such a hard
religion,” God said. “Here, I’ll write it down for you. You try it for a
while and if it doesn’t suit you, bring it back.”  So the Jewish people
tried it and found it was too hard.  For days, caravan upon caravan
stretched across the desert carrying haftorahs, mezuzahs, yarmulkes,
prayer shawls, commentaries and prayer books. God looked out at the
caravans that stretched to the horizon and said, “What’s all this? All I
wrote down for you were ten simple commandments.” 
Of course, I now realize there is more to Judaism than the story of
the ten commandments.  The full story is actually many, many stories
— rich with history, irony, and lessons for our own lives. 
There is another story that has guided me; a Hassidic tale about a
rabbi who saw that his village was about to be attacked. He went into
a special part of the forest, lit a fire, and said a prayer so that his
village might be spared. A generation later, when another threat was
upon the village, another rabbi would go to the same place in the
forest and light a fire... but he did not know the prayer. Still later,
another rabbi, hoping to save his people once more, would go into
that place in the forest. He did not know the prayer — or even how to
light the fire.  Finally, in another generation, there was another threat
and another rabbi. He was unable to light the fire, he did not know
the prayer; and he couldn’t even find the place in the forest. When 
I first heard that story, I realized that without a deliberate effort, 
our Jewish heritage might become so diminished that soon, we would
be unable to say the prayers, light the fire, or find our own place in
the forest.
Stories shape our lives and the story of Passover is one that has
been passed down through the generations. We retell it every year and
as we retell it, we discover new meaning for ourselves in the story.
Barry Louis Polisar

WE OBSERVE
Tonight, as we gather together among family and friends, we observe an
ancient festival that recalls the slavery of our people and their deliverance out
of bondage. Through the ages, Jews have commemorated the Exodus in order
to remember that our ancestors were once slaves in the land of Egypt. 
We are not the only people to have been enslaved by others. The Passover
Seder reminds us that in every age we must all do whatever we can to help
those who are enslaved by tyranny.  If a people is anywhere enslaved, exploit-
ed or oppressed, then nowhere is freedom really secure — and freedom must
never be taken for granted. 
This Seder is not just a series of prayers to be said quickly in order to get to
the meal. It is a ritual that connects us to our past. The Seder — which means
“order” — consists of fifteen different steps; over time, additional customs, songs
and hymns have been added. A Seder Plate with specific foods is prepared
before the meal and all bread and leavened products are removed from the
home before the holiday begins to fulfill the Torah commandment that during
this week of observance “no leaven shall be found in your homes.”  Each year,
we are encouraged to discover new things in the Seder and in every generation,
each one of us is meant to feel as if he or she “came forth” out of Egypt. It is in
this spirit that the story is told and handed down, each generation knowing it
has the responsibility to tell the story to the next generation. 
5
